[blog] Add Flutter Supabase offline support with Stock (#219)
xmartlabs/blog: _posts/2022-09-20-supabase_offline_with_stock_and_floor.md

---
layout: post
title: Flutter Supabase offline support with Stock
date: '2022-08-19T10:00:00.000-03:00'
author: Matías Irland
tags: [stock, supabase, fluter, firebase, firebase real-time database]
author_id: mirland
category: development
featured_image: /images/image-completion/image-completion.png
permalink: /blog/supabase-offline-support-with-stock/
---

[Supabase] is one of the most well-known open-source [Firebase] alternatives.
Although a lot of Firebase features are implemented by it, there's one that I miss a lot, **the offline support for the real-time database**.

In this post, we will cover how can we can use a local database for catching [Supabase] data using [Stock], a dart package used to combine multiple data sources and get one data `Stream`.

> However, these concepts and ideas can be applied to multiple/different situations, such as adding offline support when you are using a Rest API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you can apply these concepts and ideas to diverse situations, such as adding offline support when using a Rest API.
```

> To show how we can achieve that, in this blog post we will create a simple app, which lists all open-source Xmartlabs' projects, showing how [Stock] helps us to get excellent results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To show how we can achieve that, we'll create a simple app that lists all of Xmartlabs' open-source projects, demonstrating how [Stock] helps us get excellent results.```

> # Arch Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Architecture Overview
```

> Despite we want to build a simple app, we'll use the repository pattern, one of the most used patterns in Flutter nowadays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although we want to build a simple app, we'll use the repository pattern, one of the most used patterns in Flutter nowadays.
```

> If you don't know it, I recommend you check [this blog][repository_blog].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't about it, I suggest checking out [this blog][repository_blog].
```

> We will have 2 data sources, a remote and a local data source that will be combined by [Stock] in the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will have two data sources, a remote and a local data source, which [Stock] will combine in the repository.
```

This data will be cached in a local database, in our case, we'll use [Floor] because it's simple and it has a lot of features. If you prefer to use another one, there are a bunch of alternatives such as [Drift] or [Realm] that you can use.

METER IMAGEN DE COMO QUEDA LA

To make this project simpler, we will use just a `StatefulWidget` to display the data.
However, in a real project, you should use a state management package, like [Bloc] or [Provider].

# Build Xmartlabs OSS Project sample app

As we mentioned, we want to build an app to display some of Xmartlabs' Open Source projects.

Here is how it will look:

ADD GIF

At the beginning, we have to create a new Flutter project and create the Project entity.

```dart
class Project extends Equatable {
  final int id;
  final String name;
  final String description;
  final String url;
  final String imageUrl;
  final String language;

  // TODO: Add constuctor, define props for equals and hascode and add `fromJson` method
}
```

Full implementation [here][ref_project_entity].

## Remote Source - Supabase setup

Subabase setup is not hard, it has [good tutorials][supabase_tutorial] which shows how you can do this process. 

> In our case, I created a Supabase free project which contains only one table, `projects`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, I created a Supabase free project which contains only one table, `projects`.
```

This table is used to store the open-source Xmartlabs' project metadata.

AGREGAR IMAGEN DE LA TABLA

Then I included the `supabase_flutter` package in the flutter project, I initialized the Supabase client and I created the `ProjectSupabaseRemoteSource` with only one method, a method to get a `Stream` of projects using the Real Time Database.

```dart
  final client = await Supabase.initialize(
    url: Config.supabaseUrl,
    anonKey: Config.supabaseAnonKey,
  ).then((supabase) => supabase.client);
```

```dart
class ProjectSupabaseRemoteSource {
  final SupabaseClient _client;

  ProjectSupabaseRemoteSource(this._client);

  Stream<List<Project>> getRemoteProjectsStream() => _client
      .from('projects')
      .stream(['id'])
      .execute()
      .map((json) => json.map(Project.fromJson).toList());
}
```

The full Supabase integration could be seen [in this commit][ref_supabase_implementation].

## Local Source - Local Database setup

> On Flutter, we have a bunch of database alternatives, in this app we will use [Floor].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Flutter, we have a bunch of database alternatives, for this app, we'll use [Floor].
```

> An important comment is in this case we will use the same [Project][ref_project_entity] entity instead use different entities for database and service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually, we use separate entities for database and service, depending on your Project's complexity. In this case, we'll use the same [Project][ref_project_entity] entity instead of different ones. 
```

> We usually use different entities, but it depends on your project's complexity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> After the setup, you will have two important classes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the setup, you will have two main classes:
```

- The `Project` entity will be mapped to a table.

> - The DAO, which in this case will be our local source. This class will have methods for getting and updating the database projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The DAO, which, in this case, will be our local source. This class will have methods for getting and updating the database projects.
```

```dart
@Entity(tableName: 'projects')
class Project extends Equatable {
  @primaryKey
  final int id;
  // ... other fields
```

```dart
abstract class ProjectLocalSource {
  @Query('SELECT * FROM projects')
  Stream<List<Project>> getProjects();

  @Insert(onConflict: OnConflictStrategy.replace)
  Future<void> insertProjects(List<Project> projects);

  @Query('DELETE FROM projects')
  Future<void> deleteAllProjects();

  @transaction
  Future<void> replaceProjects(List<Project> projects) async {
    await deleteAllProjects();
    await insertProjects(projects);
  }
}
```

You can check the full database integration [here][ref_db_implementation].

> ## Repository - Stock Integration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3: Repository - Stock Integration
```

> The previous steps were not hard, we have created one entity and a couple of data sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous steps were not difficult. We created one entity and a couple of data sources.
```

> However, now is the most interesting part, the part where we have to combine different data sources to get only one stream, a stream that contains the OSS projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this is the most exciting part, where we have to combine different data sources to get only one stream that contains the OSS projects.
```

> To combine these sources **we will use [Stock]**, a dart package that is its main function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**We will use [Stock]**, a dart package whose primary function is to combine these sources.
```

> We need to provide stock two important classes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to provide stock two essential classes:
```

> - A `Fetcher`, a class to fetch the network data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Fetcher`: a class to fetch the network data. Stock provides two types of fetchers.
```

> Stock provides two types of fetchers: a fetcher from a `Stream` (ideal for this case that we are using the Real Time Database) or from a `Future` (used for example if you are consuming a REST API). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- - - `Stream`, ideal for this case, in which we use the Real Time Database.
- - - `Future`, used, for example, if you are consuming a REST API.
```

> - A `SourceOfTruth`, a class that can store the fetched data in a local cache, in our case the local cache is our [Floor] database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `SourceOfTruth`: a class that can store the fetched data in a local cache. In our case, the local cache is our [Floor] database.
```

> These classes are defined by two types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two types define these classes:
```

> - The `Key`, a type used to get de data. That key can have important information like an `id`, or the current page number if you are fetching a list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `Key`, a type commonly used to get de data. That key can have important information like an `id` or the current page number if you are fetching a list. In our example, we won't use it because we will bring all data just using one endpoint.
 ```

> In our example. we will not use it because we will fetch all data just using one endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- The entity class, in our example a `List<Project>`. The `Fetcher` and the `SourceOfTruth` could use different types, but they should be mapped to the same type using a [StockTypeMapper].

```dart
class ProjectRepository {
  final Stock<dynamic, List<Project>> _stock;

  ProjectRepository(
    ProjectLocalSource projectLocalSource,
    ProjectSupabaseRemoteSource projectRemoteSource,
  ) : _stock = Stock<dynamic, List<Project>>(
          fetcher: Fetcher.ofStream(
            (_) => projectRemoteSource.getRemoteProjectsStream(),
          ),
          sourceOfTruth: SourceOfTruth<dynamic, List<Project>>(
            reader: (_) => projectLocalSource.getProjects(),
            writer: (_, projects) =>
                projectLocalSource.replaceProjects(projects ?? []),
          ),
        );

  Stream<StockResponse<List<Project>>> getProjects() => _stock.stream(null);
}
```

> `Stock` provides a `Stream` of `StockResponse`, which has 3 possible values: `StockResponseLoading`, `StockResponseData` or `StockResponseError`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Stock` provides a `Stream` of `StockResponse`, which has three possible values: `StockResponseLoading`, `StockResponseData`, or `StockResponseError`. 
```

> With that `Stream` we are ready to display the data and the state in the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With that `Stream`, we are ready to display the data and its state in the UI.
```

Reviewer: If "state" is referring to the data's state, then correct. If not, add what state it's talking about or simply leave "the state" and don't mind the correction.

> The full implementation could be checked [in this commit][ref_stock_implementation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inspect the full implementation [in this commit][ref_stock_implementation].
```

> ### Handle stock responses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Part 4: Handle stock responses
```

> This is the last part, where we handle the 3 different response types, the error, the data and the loading state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this last part, we'll handle the three different response types: the error, the data, and the loading state. 
```

        setState(() => isLoading = true);
      } else {
        if (isLoading && response.origin == ResponseOrigin.fetcher) {
          setState(() => isLoading = false);
        }
        ScaffoldMessenger.of(context).showSnackBar(SnackBar(
          content: Text(
            'An error happened!: ${(response as StockResponseError).error}',
          ),
        ));
      }
    });
  }

  @override
  void dispose() {
    _subscription.cancel();
    super.dispose();
  }
}
```

So the last thing is using the state to display the data:

```dart
class _OssProjectsPageState extends State<OssProjectsPage> {
  //.... previous code
  
  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Scaffold(
      appBar: AppBar(title: const Text('Xmartlabs OSS Projects')),
      body: Stack(
        alignment: AlignmentDirectional.center,
        children: [
          ListView.builder(
            padding: const EdgeInsets.all(8.0),
            itemCount: projects?.length ?? 0,
            itemBuilder: (context, index) =>
                _ProjectWidget(project: projects![index]),
          ),
          if (isLoading) const CircularProgressIndicator(),
        ],
      ),
    );
  }
}
```

> You can check the full example on [GitHub](https://github.com/mirland/supabase-offline-support-with-stock/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The complete example is on [GitHub](https://github.com/mirland/supabase-offline-support-with-stock/), so go ahead and check it out!
```

# Conclusion

> In this blog, we analyzed how we can integrate offline support easily to Supabase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This blog analyzed how we can integrate offline support easily to Supabase.
```

> Furthermore, if we replace [Supababse] with another provider, or use just a rest API the code will be the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, if we replace [Supababse] with another provider or simply use a rest API, the code will be the same. 
```

> So that is one of the most important things about this architecture, the Data layer could change, and you don't have to do any changes to your presentation layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So if your data layer changes, you don't have to make any changes to your presentation layer, which is one of the essential aspects of this architecture.
```

> In my experience, offline support moves the app experience to the next level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In my experience, offline support moves app experience to the next level.
```

> You can remove ugly spinners, and give feedback to the user instantaneously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can remove ugly spinners and give feedback to the user instantaneously. So making an effort to achieve it is worth it. 
```

> On the other hand, we saw how [Stock] helped us to achieve this feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also had a glimpse of how [Stock] helped us to achieve this feature.
```

> The hardest work such as synchronizations, state reporting, store the data, was done by the package, so it allows app to move very fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The package did the most challenging tasks, such as synchronizations, state reporting, and data storing, allowing the app to run extremely fast.
```

> I invite you to try it and do not forget to share your feedback!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I encourage you to try it out and share your feedback!
```

[Bloc]: https://pub.dev/packages/bloc
[Drift]: https://pub.dev/packages/drift
[Firebase]: https://firebase.google.com/
[Floor]: https://pub.dev/packages/floor
[GetIt]: https://pub.dev/packages/get_it
[Provider]: https://pub.dev/packages/provider
[Realm]: https://pub.dev/packages/realm

> [ref_db_implementation]: https://github.com/mirland/supabase-offline-support-with-stock/commit/b46cb20f22453448718b85fcd63b811ad51afd11

Reviewer: Link doesn't work on my end 🙁

> [ref_stock_implementation]: hhttps://github.com/mirland/supabase-offline-support-with-stock/commit/0492f2d257e93333bd343e303cd597eb9d80554a#diff-f3374e5f8e848d41b528d205b7a44d6d2642049a5f7a5c78d51b74f0116596f2R6

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[ref_stock_implementation]: https://github.com/mirland/supabase-offline-support-with-stock/commit/0492f2d257e93333bd343e303cd597eb9d80554a#diff-f3374e5f8e848d41b528d205b7a44d6d2642049a5f7a5c78d51b74f0116596f2R6
```

> [ref_project_entity]: https://github.com/mirland/supabase-offline-support-with-stock/commit/baccd9463d6703cb10df69e6cb13e21950e028f6#diff-fc21a29884a4f9313eb6bd5bc24aad30604d0de4d096488d739035aa2356850aR3

Reviewer: Link doesn't work on my end 🙁

> [ref_supabase_implementation]: https://github.com/mirland/supabase-offline-support-with-stock/commit/f4fcea6036e82dbfa4b53afd28378ed63098f1d4

Reviewer: Link doesn't work on my end 🙁

---
layout: post
title: Get Flutter's offline support in Supabase
date: '2022-08-19T10:00:00.000-03:00'
author: Matías Irland
tags: [stock, supabase, fluter, firebase, firebase real-time database]
author_id: mirland
category: development
featured_image: /images/supabase-offline-suport/banner.png
permalink: /blog/supabase-offline-support-with-stock/
---

> <!-- TODO: change banner -->

Reviewer 2: Already discussed 😅

# Architecture Overview

Although we want to build a simple app, we'll use the repository pattern, one of the most used patterns in Flutter nowadays.
If you don't know about it, I suggest checking out [this blog][repository_blog].

We will have two data sources, a remote and a local data source, which [Stock] will combine in the repository.

Because we want to use the real-time database, we'll use the [Supabase fluter package].
Although the package provides many features, you can use Supabase as a REST API.

Your local database will store this data.
In our case, we'll use [Floor] because it's simple and has many features.
If you'd prefer to use another one, there are a bunch of alternatives, such as [Drift] or [Realm], you can use.

<img width="100%" src="/images/supabase-offline-suport/arch_overview.png" />

We will use a `StatefulWidget` to display the data to simplify this Project. 
However, in an actual project, you should use a state management package, like [Bloc] or [Provider].

# Sample app: listing our company's OSS projects

As mentioned, we want to build an app that displays Xmartlabs' Open Source projects.

Here's how it will look:

> <!-- TODO: change video -->

Reviewer 2: Already discussed 😅

class Project extends Equatable {
  @primaryKey
  final int id;
  // ... other fields
```

```dart
abstract class ProjectLocalSource {
  @Query('SELECT * FROM projects')
  Stream<List<Project>> getProjects();

  @Insert(onConflict: OnConflictStrategy.replace)
  Future<void> insertProjects(List<Project> projects);

  @Query('DELETE FROM projects')
  Future<void> deleteAllProjects();

  @transaction
  Future<void> replaceProjects(List<Project> projects) async {
    await deleteAllProjects();
    await insertProjects(projects);
  }
}
```

You can check the full database integration [here][ref_db_implementation].

## Step 3: Repository - Stock Integration

The previous steps were not difficult.
We created one entity and a couple of data sources.
However, this is the most exciting part, where we have to combine different data sources to get only one stream that contains the OSS projects.

**We will use [Stock]**, a dart package whose primary function is to combine these sources.
We need to provide stock two essential classes:
- `Fetcher`: a class to fetch the network data. Stock provides two types of fetchers.
  - `Stream`, ideal for this case, in which we use the Real Time Database.

>   - `Future`, used, for example, if you are consuming a REST API.

Author: Yep, you usually create a `Future` using the `async` keyword and use `await` to await the result.

>   - `Future`, used, for example, if you are consuming a REST API.

Reviewer 2: I meant when to use `Stream` vs when to use `Future` not how to use `Future` 😅

We also had a glimpse of how [Stock] helped us to achieve this feature.
The package did the most challenging tasks, such as synchronizations, state reporting, and data storing, allowing the app to run extremely fast.

> I encourage you to try it out and share your feedback, and of course, you are welcome to contribute to it!

Reviewer: I encourage you to try it out and share your feedback and contributions!
